%!TEX root = paper.tex
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%%%%%%%

\section{Introduction}

Cloud gaming has become quite a popular research topic in recent years.
Much of this research is aimed at comparing the experienced quality of
cloud gaming to that of conventional gaming approaches, often with
reasonable results for the streaming approach (cf., for example,
\cite{5976180}). So, if there are only negligible quality drawbacks,
what about the commercial success of cloud gaming? Intuitively, one
would assume that this could yield substantial benefits in terms of cost
and flexibility as a result of scaling effects through the used cloud
gaming hardware in comparison to equipment-heavy classical home gaming
approaches. However, the cloud gaming market seems to stagnate with a
high rate of fluctuation on the market, i.e., a constant stream of
market entrances and exits. For example, one of the most prominent
services in the past, \textsc{OnLive}, ceased to exist in 2015.

%shut down and was forced to sell off its remaining assets.

%\todo[inline]{PZ: ``sell off its remaining assets'' -- means?}
%\todo[inline]{FM: intellectual property, mainly the remaining patent portfolio (to Sony)}

%In theory, there could be large economic benefits for users that should foster a quick adaptation of such services. quite a few commercial services have already come and gone, with a rather high rate of fluctuation.

Many cloud gaming approaches that vary by means of technical, service
and pricing model differences, have been tested so far, but the public
interest remains low. This might be attributed to the broad range of
available, established substitutes, e.g., non-cloud gaming platforms
such as video game consoles or PCs ---
with\steam\footnote{\url{http://store.steampowered.com/}} as one of the
largest contenders. The move to digital distribution made gaming on PCs
quite popular, and PC games pricing became much more dynamic and
affordable in the process.

On the surface, current cloud gaming services attempt to adopt a
\textit{fixed fee subscription} model over the traditional \textit{à la
carte} model. Fixed fee subscription proved to be hugely successful for
other types of media, e.g., \textsc{Netflix} for movies and shows or
\textsc{Spotify} for music. However, these two types of services offer a
much larger catalogue of content at a comparable or even lower price
than cloud gaming services. Additionally, streaming asynchronous
non-interactive media is technically less demanding (and thus cheaper to
operate) than maintaining a quality level on par with that of locally
running games.

The two main research questions that this work aims to tackle are thus:
\textit{``Can cloud gaming be attractive for users in today's highly
competitive market?''} and \textit{``Can you operate a cloud gaming
service with acceptable margins while maintaining acceptable quality
levels?''}. Both questions are strongly intertwined as in order to make
such services attractive one would have to offer sufficient quality and
quantity of games with a competitive pricing while not operating at a
loss. Given the current market situation, one could actually paraphrase
both questions into one: \textit{``Can you compete with the PC gaming
and Steam ecosystem (in terms of quality, prices, and variety)?''}

In order to answer these questions, this paper looks at the perspectives
of users and service providers separately, and provides arguments backed
by data and simple models. To investigate the customer's perspective we
employ domain-specific user engagement metrics (like review scores and
lengths and playtimes of games) to compare various services, cloud
gaming as well as conventional, to each other. Additionally, using this
data models are set up that project the value (in terms of the number of
games) a user gets for a certain amount of money. We find that in the
investigated cases the cloud gaming services' offer is limited, yet
still charges relatively high prices, thus reducing the attractiveness
for users in comparison to alternative services. We find this to apply
especially for gamers with higher budgets and interest in a larger
selection of games.

Due to the limited amount of freely available data on operating a cloud
gaming service, the perspective of the cloud gaming operator is
investigated by setting up efficiency models centered around the
analysis of overbooking practices for server resources. Our initial
results hint at the problematic nature of cloud gaming in terms of
scaling and cost efficiency. When compared to other cloud services that
achieve high values of cost efficiency and capacity utilization, we
believe that cloud gaming platforms will be much more peak-oriented and
thus achieve much lower values of server utilization. The end-to-end lag
requirements of games demand servers located in the user's vicinity,
which eliminates most multiplexing gains that a centralized data center
could garner over the course of a day. Thus, the scaling benefits may be
substantially lower than for other cloud services. Additionally, games
require dedicated hardware support, which is of less use to most other
cloud service use cases, diminishing the potential of cross-service
reuse.

These initial insights do not shed a bright light on the commercial
future of cloud gaming services in general. Unless major cost reductions
are achieved, while the streaming quality is maintained or even
improved, the future of cloud gaming might be bleak. But there still
might be some niches to place a cloud gaming service where the
competition is less strong --- a route that one of the current cloud
gaming services already takes. We plan to take a deeper look at all
these aspects and provide more detailed models in the future.

~\\
This paper is structured as follows: §~\ref{sec:relatedwork} provides a
brief overview of the related work. Afterwards, §~\ref{sec:background}
explains the necessary terms and technical details. The main part of
this work encompass §§~\ref{sec:engagement} and
\ref{sec:suppliermodelling}, which conduct the dual-perspective
investigation of the cloud gaming providers' service offering and
business case. The paper concludes in §~\ref{sec:conclusion} with some
remarks and an outlook.

%and their competitions' business models and engagement from the angle of the user and the platform operator respectively.

%%%%%%%%%%%%
% \subsection{Fragestellungen}

% \begin{itemize}
% 	\item Kostenmodell für Cloud Gaming Provider?
% 	\item Attraktivität für “Core Gamer”?
% 	\item Wieviel ist eine NutzerIn bereit für einen Streaming Service mit einem bestimmten Spieleangebot und einer bestimmten Streaming- Qualität (Video-Qualität, Latenz, Grafikeinstellungen des Spiels) zu zahlen?
% 	\item Can they be competitive against other gaming platforms, both from provider as well as customer perspective
% 			Most challenging: can it beat the Steam price model and quality/number of games? (plus bundle providers and sales)
% \end{itemize}
% Netflix-Analogie?
